Changes of the water distribution and the internal structure of a rice grain during cooking are closely related to the gelatinization characteristics, which influence the texture profiles of cooked rice. The gravimetric change in the rice grain during boiling was analyzed using a shell and core model developed by Suzuki et al. (1997).The model assumes that the gelatinization is much more rapid than the rate of water diffusion in a grain. This means that a partly boiled grain has an ungelatinized core covered by a gelatinized shell, which influences the eating quality of cooked rice. The core and the shell should therefore be measurable by the moisture profile in a grain. The geometrical changes in grains during cooking, which were followed by the kinetic study using various models, can be measured by on-line image acquisition. Ramesh (2001) inspected the swelling characteristics of whole rice grains under various temperatures using a digital image-analysis system on a real-time basis, and evaluated the cooking kinetics of the whole rice grains. In order to determine the hot water hydration kinetics, he carried out the two-dimensional image analysis on basmati rice, which is a long-grain type, and could not apply a sphere mathematical model for moisture movement in rice. The projected area of rice grains was converted into swelling ratios for the comparison of the swelling at different temperatures. The reaction rate constant and the activation energy for the hot water hydration were obtained from the swelling data. The hydration data were further analyzed to generalize a polynomial equation correlating swelling ratios to the heating time and temperature. Ramesh also concluded that this helped the design of cooking equipment by providing a progressive increase in volume towards the discharge end to accommodate the swelling as cooking proceeds.

Takeuchi et al. (1997a, 1997b) developed a real-time measurement technique for visualization of the moisture profiles in a rice grain during boiling by quick and onedimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) imaging with the adaptation of a multi-echo technique. Changes in the moisture distribution in a rice grain during boiling were evaluated by the proposed technique. The moisture content of the grain increased during boiling, and thus influenced gelatinization of the starch in the starch-stored cells. The moisture population map, which was represented by a virtual slice of the partly boiled grain, showed an asymmetrical progress of the moisture uptake in the grain. Therefore, they hypothesized that the water diffusion (moisture absorbance) in a grain was possibly restricted by cell-wall components of the starch-stored cells and the protein layers such as aleurone and subaleurone. They found, however, that cellwall materials had little effect on resisting moisture migration. Watanabe et al. (2001) proposed a non-Fickian diffusion mathematical model for water migration in rice grains during cooking based on the NMR-imaging technique. The migration of water is driven by the gradient of water demand, which is defined as the difference between the ceiling moisture content and the existing moisture content in the model. Their model was demonstrated to have potential for describing the anomalous characteristic features of water migration in a grain during cooking. The total limited water content within the rice grain was calculated and employed as an indicator of both the concentration and the distribution of water in the grain during cooking, observed by the NMR imaging technique (Kasai et al., 2005)

Horigane et al. (1999) discovered the existence of hollows in a cooked rice grain, and proposed a mechanism to explain their formation, using NMR micro-imaging of protons (1H). Their NMR micro-imaging techniques have mainly been limited to test-tube samples, allowing only a few grains to be analyzed at a time, although it is necessary to analyze multiple samples to ensure rapid, statistically sound conclusions. The samples were observed and analyzed by using two-dimensional images of longitudinal and transverse sections from three-dimensional NMR micro-images. Dark spots were found in the transverse sections and were surrounded by a peripheral layer of high proton-density. Such dark spots existed only within the grain, and caused no lacerations on the grain surface. The authors therefore hypothesized that a dark spot was due to either a low proton-density substance, or gases that appeared as a hollow. The presence of gases in the hollow regions was only known to occur in cracks or fissures, and they confirmed, by a photomicrograph of the longitudinal section, that the dark spots were enclosed in hollow regions of the cooked grains. The hollows were related to structural changes that must have occurred during cooking, because no hollows were observed in uncooked grains except for cracks or fissures. They also found that the hollows appeared in the measurement of time-series images of the center layer in grains during cooking, which indicated changes in the internal structure and in water distribution. Accordingly, they concluded that the hollows originated from cracks or fissures of raw grain, and were caused by the sealing of such lacerations with gelatinized starch in the peripheral layer in combination with expansion of the grain during cooking. The hollows in a grain make the endosperm tissue less homogenous, and therefore influence the texture and structural properties of cooked rice. The hollows were also detected by other imaging techniques. Suzuki et al. (1999) applied X-ray imaging and a light transmittance photography techniques for the detection of hollows in a grain. They concluded that light transmittance photography was an effective and useful technique, although NMR imaging, the operation of which is very difficult, could provide more precise images and three-dimensional and quantitative measures of the depth and volume of hollows. Suzuki et al. (2002) also reported that hollow size, which was easily measured by the light transmittance method, was different in each cultivar.

Hollow volumes were measured by the NMR micro-imaging technique (Horigane et al., 2000). The size, shape, and total volume of hollows for five cultivars with various amylose content were measured. Factors that influence hollow shape and volume should be related to either grain expansion or the gelatinization characteristics of the starchy endosperm. Endosperm amylose content is one such factor. However, they found that the volume increased during gelatinization, which was negatively related to the amylose content. Cracks and fissures in the grain, which are also important for the formation of hollows, occur prior to cooking in most cultivars due to soaking or changes in relative humidity. It seems unlikely that the differences in hollow formation among cultivars can be explained by the presence or absence of cracks and fissures. Thus, the volume should be measured, for example, the changes in hollow ratio during cooking, and calculated from the three-dimensional images constructed from serial slice images of the samples. In the research work of Horigane et al. (2000), the volume of hollows increased with grain volume and length during cooking below 100?C. Compared with this, the volume subsequently decreased during prolonged boiling. It was also assumed that there was a relationship between amylose content and hollow formation, based on their hypothetical model. However, it was concluded that there was no correlation between the final hollow volume and shape, and individual parameters such as flour gelatinization and amylose content. NMR micro-imaging was performed on a 7.1 T NMR spectrometer, and its settings resulted in a total acquisition time of 4.6 hours. Therefore, this approach inevitably involves long acquisition time and is not suitable for real-time observation of water transport in such a complex microstructure. Because a long scanning time and low spatial resolution lead to erroneous results, a short scan time and high spatial resolution are critical factors in the investigation of the cooking behavior of rice kernels.

Mohoric et al. (2004) proposed optimized three-dimensional NMR imaging with high spatial resolution based on the rapid acquisition relaxation enhanced (RARE) imaging method for the monitoring of cooking of a single rice kernel in real time. They aimed to achieve both high temporal and high spatial resolution in order to establish relationships between moisture content profiles, rice kernel microstructures, and the extent of gelatinization, and to develop the general pattern of moisture ingress. They used the three-dimensional RARE imaging sequence to record images of resolution of 128 × 32 × 16 voxels with a volume of 117 × 156 × 313 µm3. An image was scanned in 64 seconds, and the images in time series spanned 30 minutes of the cooking process. Results were obtained from such real-time observation at high resolution, and the water uptake was determined by analysis of the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Results were compared with previous studies, and the general pattern of moisture ingress – i.e. the shape of moisture profiles and the actual facts – were generalized. Based on these results, a sophisticated model of water uptake in a three-dimensional substrate structure during different types of water diffusion, and the swelling of the substrate, can be developed for the simulation and interpretation of three-dimensional ingress patterns of moisture as observed by MRI imaging. 

Histological compound distributions, related to the physical, chemical and physicochemical properties of cooked rice, are also important in evaluating cooked rice qualities. In general, textural properties of cooked rice have great correlation with the morphological structures of a single kernel, and observation of histological structures (such as the compound distributions in the cooked grain) thus contributes to the quality inspection and evaluation of cooked rice. Microscopic techniques can be applied to individual grain kernels to identify the histological characteristics of cooked rice, and can also visualize structural details required for the evaluation of histological characteristics. To allow the digestibility of protein of rice, Bradbury et al. (1980) photographed the condition of histological components in a small segment of boiled rice kernel using the electron microscope. However, the rice kernel has inhomogeneous structures (Takeoka et al., 1993), and therefore not only small segments but also whole kernel sections are required for the evaluation of cooked rice grains. Although the frozen-sectioning method can be proposed for the collection of whole sections of a cooked kernel, it cannot produce quality sections because cooked rice kernels have poor physical properties for sectioning. Ogawa et al. (2003b) thus applied a combination method of tape-aided sectioning on a standard microtome and an autofluorescence visualization technique by microscope in the ultraviolet (UV) range to observe the histological properties, such as the location of phenolic cell wall materials, which were responsible for the autofluorescence produced using UV light (Fulcher, 1982). As a result, cell distributions, cell formations, and disruptions can be visualized. They also used scanning electron microscopy (SEM) as a complementary tool to fluorescence microscopy. Figure 16.7 shows a microscopy and an autofluorescent sample image of the same longitudinal section (20 µm thick) of a cooked rice kernel, which is stuck to adhesive tape. These images prove that quality sections for the cooked rice kernel can be obtained using the tape-sectioning method. In the autofluorescent image (Figure 16.7b), it can be seen that cell walls are destroyed at the outer area of kernels. Cell walls around the inner area are not destroyed in the non-void section (Figure 16.8). As demonstrated by the cell distributions and cell-wall formations at the various areas in the section, it was posited that cell walls tended to be damaged at the cells around the border between the rice and water during cooking, because internal areas of the non-void section had a clear distribution of cells similar to that of milled rice kernels. When rice is cooked, some compounds (such as carbohydrate and lipid) are dissolved into the cooking water, which gradually becomes concentrated and turns into a viscous liquid during boiling. This liquid becomes the membrane cover of the surface of cooked grain kernels in the final cooking stage, and is thus related to the eating quality of rice (Hoshikawa, 1993a). Cell disruptions allow the dissolution of such internal compounds into the cooking water. Furthermore, cell disruptions are related to the texture. Because it is considered that the balance between cell disruptions and the dissolution of compounds into cooking water depends on the cooking process, differences in eating quality, which are caused by changes in cooking condition and recognized by experience, must be influenced by the histological and structural properties of the cooked grain kernels.

Ogawa’s visualization technique can reveal the relationship between the histological, structural, and textural properties of cooked rice. Ogawa et al. (2006) studied the structural changes occurring in the cooked rice grain, after compression to a specific percentage, to show the relationship between texture and structure. The images are shown in Fig. 16.9.

A compressed cooked rice grain was observed with the resistance force (Figure 16.10). The resistance force, which increased with the compression ratio, was linear up to 40 percent compression and was non-linearly increased when the compression ratio was above 50 percent (Figure 16.10). Microscopy samples were sectioned parallel to and viewed perpendicular to the direction of compression. The sections were collected at approximately the mid-point of each kernel in order to visualize the effects of compression. As the compression ratio increased, voided areas (empty or water-filled cavities) in the samples decreased and disappeared with higher compression ratios. At the initial phase of compression, voided areas offer little resistance to crushing. As compression increased, the dense and starchy material of the kernel absorbed the pressure and the cells began to be crushed. The differences in structure at various points of compression explain the linear behavior of the resistance force versus compression ratios up to 40 percent, and the non-linear behavior when the compression ratio increases beyond this level. In the uncompressed cooked kernel, relatively intact cells are found in the voided area. Surrounding the void area there are cells with disrupted cell walls and, therefore, free starch granules. Starch granules in the disrupted cells have already had access to water and become completely gelatinized with cooking, so the voids are sealed by gelatinized starch. Structural details of the voided areas show the way that voids and surrounding tissues change during compression. In the uncompressed kernels, the void is relatively narrow and pointed towards the lateral sides. Compression of the kernel at 30 percent causes the void to become wider in the center and perhaps split more towards the periphery of the kernel, whereas individual cells surrounding the void become only slightly distorted. Compressions of 50 percent and 70 percent, decreased the void volume, and distorted shapes of cells somewhat, affecting cell integrity. The effects of compression at 50 percent are less than those at 70 percent. Areas without voids are also compared structurally with those at the edge of the kernel. The cells of a cooked and uncompressed kernel are radially oriented as in a raw kernel, and the cells appear to be mostly intact. Compression at 70 percent causes cells to be more rounded in shape due to the effects of crushing, with surprisingly few areas where the cell walls have been torn. Cell walls are evidently capable of plastic deformation not only upon cooking but also with compression. The degree to which the kernel structure changed during the various compression tests, combined with the linear and then non-linear behavior of the resistance force versus the compression ratio, indicates that the voided areas and cell walls have an effect on texture.

SEM images were also used to visualize changes of the compound formations contained in the rice grain during cooking or processing. Sandhya and Bhattacharya (1995) determined the relative rigidity/fragility of starch granules by SEM. They reported that the low-amylose rice starch showed total granule disintegration after 60 minutes of cooking at 95?C, but that high-amylose granules demonstrated only marginal disorganization in concentrated (12%) pastes. Waxy starch granules disintegrated even at 70?C. Apart from this, granules swelled without appreciable disruption and thus apparently more in low amylase starch than in high amylose starch in dilute (1%) pastes. Their results also indicated that the low-amylose starch granules were weak and fragile, and thus swelled and disintegrated easily. The high-amylose rice starch was relatively trong and rigid, so it resisted swelling or disintegration.They therefore concluded that the relative rigidity/fragility of starch granules is key to differences in rice quality.