Ogawa et al. (2002a) also developed another three-dimensional visualizing technique for the observation of rice-seed structure in three dimensions. A three-dimensional internal structure observation system (3D-ISOS, Toshiba Machine Co. Ltd, Numazu, Japan) was applied to observe a rice caryopses structure during developing.This system can slice a sample material sequentially and capture each cross-section using a color CCD imaging device (DXC-930, Sony Co., Tokyo, Japan), incorporating uniform lighting conditions. Because the captured images of the cross-section are sequentially digitized, they can be virtually stacked in a personal computer using the volumerendering method. As a result, the three-dimensional structure of the sample material can be visualized by displaying the stacked image set. To obtain samples of dyed rice seed, a cut stem bearing a panicle, collected 30 days after flowering (before the fullyripe stage), was placed in a 0.1% rhodamine B solution in distilled water for 2 days to imbibe the dye. Figure 16.5 shows images of the resulting three-dimensional model of the rice seed produced by the virtually stacking of the serial image set of the crosssections. Figure 16.5a shows the image of the simple three-dimensional model, while Figure 16.5b represents a three-dimensional form of the vascular bundle. This model was extracted from Figure 16.5a by image processing to suppress the green and white voxels. Using this technique, the three-dimensional structure of the vascular bundles can be observed by color extraction based on natural pigmentation or artificial dyeing.

Ogawa et al. (2002b) also determined the lipid distribution of a brown rice kernel in three dimensions by application of the tape-aided sectioning technique. Lipid is one of the major constituents of rice grain, and its distribution is not uniform in the brown rice kernel, as measured by chemical analysis for the graded milling flours (Kennedy et al., 1974). It was also reported that the outer layer of rice kernels, which was in the bran including the germ, had larger amounts of lipid than did the inner parts, i.e. the core or inner endosperm. Stored rice, especially that stored for an extended period after harvesting, does not have a pleasant odor when it is cooked. This odor is linked to the enzyme reactions and/or lipid autoxidation (Yasumatsu and Moritaka, 1964). Lipid autoxidation, which influences the rice quality, is immediately triggered by air contact. The lipids that are located in the outer area of a kernel are considered to be more oxidizable than those in the inner parts. The observation of lipid distribution in three dimensions is thus a significant improvement to the research carried out to this point. In general, histochemical techniques have been applied for the observation of chemical distributions in a section. In order to obtain sections from a material, paraffin is commonly used as the embedding material. Consequently, paraffinization and deparaffinization steps are required, including a xylene-soaking process. As not only paraffin but also the lipid content is removed from the thin section by the xylene-soaking process, the common paraffin-embedding method is not suitable for the observation of the real lipid distribution in a grain section. Although the resin-embedding methods using polymeric resin, or frozen-section methods for materials with high water content have been used for lipid observation, a small piece of chopped specimen is needed to obtain sections. Therefore, the lipid distribution in an area as large as a whole rice section is difficult to measure by the usual histochemical technique except by tape-aided sectioning. By application of tape-aided sectioning, preparatory steps for sectioning (such as sample dehydration, paraffinization, and deparaffinization procedures, which would influence lipid content) can be safely omitted for the kernel and its sections. Sample grains can be directly embedded in the liquid paraffin, but the liquid paraffin cannot infiltrate into the grain because of moisture in the kernel. Other than the waxy paraffin slices, which are around the rice section and also stuck to the adhesive tape to repel the staining solution, only the grain section was stained. Figure 16.6 shows the resulting images of a virtually divided model for the three-dimensional isolated lipid distribution, and its schematic form. The distinct lipid distribution at the divided plane can be shown. It is clear that the lipid tends to distribute at the dorsal side more prominently than at the ventral side in the sample kernel. Juliano (1972) and Takeoka et al. (1993) reported that lipid in the endosperm of rice existed most prominently in the cells of the aleurone layer, and its content was very small in the starch-storing tissue, which was located in the inner area of the rice kernel. By this visualization technique, the differences in lipid distribution in rice kernels of various cultivars, growth conditions, and post-harvest processing can be measured. Moreover, not only Sudan Black B but also other dyes can be applied for this technique. For example, for the visualization of differentiated lipid contents, which can be classified in fatty acids, neutral lipids, and so on, it has the potential to shed light on many phenomena, such as the mechanism of lipid autoxidation in a rice kernel.


Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a micro-imaging technique in which a sharp, probing tip is scanned over the surface of a sample. Interactions between the tip and the sample are translated into a three-dimensional image with resolution ranging from nanometers to micrometers. Using the AFM imaging technique, morphological features in the natural state and topographical information regarding biological samples, such as biological membranes, cell surface, and the molecular structure of various biological macromolecules, can be obtained. Dang and Copeland (2003) applied AFM imaging on the surface of cut grains of several rice varieties chosen on the basis of different amylase-amylopectin ratios and cooking properties. The angular starch structures (3–8 µm in size) were arranged in layers approximately 400 nm apart. The layers represented the growth rings of starch granule formation, and the cross-striations in each layer corresponded to the blocklets of amorphous and crystalline regions within the starch granule. Such blocklets had an average size of 100 nm, and were proposed to comprise approximately 280 amylopectin side-chain clusters.

The photoluminescence imaging technique, which is based on the spectral characteristics of visible light emitted from organic and inorganic compounds under UV irradiation, with video imaging and digital image processing, is suitable for quick and non-destructive quality control in various types of processing. Visible light photoluminescence from polished rice and some other starches was evaluated using a two-dimensional photoluminescence imaging technique in a quality control system for foods (Katsumata et al., 2005).Their visible light photoluminescence had a broad peak at a wavelength of 462 nm from starchy foods under illumination of ultraviolet light at 365 nm. Peak intensity of photoluminescence varies with the variety and the source of rice. The brightness over the photoluminescence image of rice of a single breed, from a single source, distributes according to a Gaussian distribution curve. The deviationof fitting result of brightness from the Gaussian distribution curve, which is estimated as ?2 value, and the correlation coefficient increased in rice specimens of various species of blended rice. Most grains, including rice, are composed of amylopectin, amylose, amino-acids, fatty-acids, and inorganic minerals, etc. Although the origin of the visible light luminescence from starchy foods is unidentified, lots of compounds emit visible light photoluminescence under UV irradiation. Thus, the relative contents of amylopectin and amylose, the concentration of amino acids and inorganic minerals such as Ca, Na, and K, may influence the photoluminescence intensity of rice. Because the quality of rice was influenced by these compounds, Katsumata and colleagues concluded that the photoluminescence imaging technique was potentially useful for quality evaluation of the rice. For example, the blended rice from different species could be detected using a two-dimensional photoluminescence imaging technique. 